    The Future of the Grid: Policy, Technology and Market Change
    by Casey Canfield
    
    >> Zeeshan:  All right, all right, all right! Cool. Everyone get in. There's seats up front as usual. The awesome front seats, and that will give everybody a chance to sit down ... Going well so far? Yeah? Right? Woo!   All right. So our next speaker, Casey Canfield, is from St. Louis University of Technology. So, local. Casey came to us via a recommendation from a professor at CMU, and Casey went to CMU for doing engineering and public policy. Now she's at Missouri S & T so kind of two things that she was interested in. She had done research in the human factors in things like phishing detection and security and energy grid modernization. But it's awesome, sustainability and all these things were kind of key principles and I was like, this is different, this is awesome, and so given the task, I was like, let's see if we can do this talk on energy grid modernization and everything about it and and so thank you, Casey for doing it.
    >> So I'm going to be talking about the future of the grid, policy, technology, and market changes.
    So it's an incredibly exciting time to be talking about the changing electricity grid and so there's a huge amount of change going on. As we try to do this transition from all of this 20th Century aging infrastructure to try and meet our 21st century demands. And so obviously this type of change is going to create conflict. You know, people are not going to agree about which way to go forward. And so some places have, like cities, states, counties, they've made 100% renewable energy goals. These are really trying to get at the sustainability and climate change issues. There's other places, like Puerto Rico, the Carolinas, just recently where they're really focused on resiliency and trying to think about how can we keep the lights on in the face of all these extreme weather events. And then there's the utilities. The utilities are just trying to figure out how they can keep operating, how their business model can stay relevant, and so the utility death spiral is something that comes up a lot in these conversations, and so the utility did go viral is basically the whole concept that as more and more people are developing solar and these types of distributed technologies, they're going to defect from the grid and so there's going to be less people who are getting electricity from the utility and so the utility doesn't have as many people to spread those costs across, so that's going to increase the cost of electricity coming across the utility and more people are going to effect and this is going to go on and on until the utility collapses into a death spiral. So what I want to talk to you about is kind of what's going on with the grid today, what is driving some of these changes, and how are we going to navigate this?
    So a big question here is going to be like we have what's going on today, I'm going to talk about one potential future, a spoiler alert: It's going to involve blockchain
    [laughter]
    
    But then the question that I'm really interested in is how do we navigate this? Like, what types of analysis do we need for the regulators and the policymakers and the utilities who are the ones who are making these decisions and trying to figure out what should we invest in now and what's going to be relevant in the future? And then I'm going to leave you with a couple thoughts about how you fit in and where you might be able to participate in this.
    So generally, electricity's generated at these big power plants, and gets shoved on to the transmission grid, and so the transmission grid is designed to be able to transport electricity over really long distances and so because of that it's at a really high voltage and so it will be 100, 700 kilovolts and then it goes through a transformer and steps down the voltage and so it steps down to be part of the distribution grid. It's at a lower voltage, it's at like 10 kilovolts and when it gets closer to your house, it gets stepped down to 120 volts which is what we actually use for our regular electricity.
    And so on this map of the transmission grid you'll see there are some gray and purple lines. Those are on the lower end of the voltage so that's around 100kilo volts, but then the red and the light pink that's on the higher end, so that's going to be around 300, 500 kilovolts. So the very first transmission line was installed in 1889 in Oregon, and so it was actually from the Willamett Falls in Oregon to downtown Portland. In 1936, we passed the Rural Electrification Act, and so that was to create these low-interest federal loans so we could actually pay for distribution grids to be built in rural areas. And nowadays, that same law is actually being used for rural broadband, so it gives you a sense of how our ideas about basic needs have changed over time.
    And so the entire grid is interconnected, but it's also separated into three main parts and so there's the western interconnection, the eastern interconnection, and the Texas interconnection.
    [laughter]
    yeah, you don't mess with Texas and these regions are managed separately and within these region we have several different balancing authorities. So they are responsible for balancing the demand and the supply of the electrical grid at every single moment and so right now we don't really have much storage on the grid, which would make this a lot easier, so operators have to be paying attention at every moment, forecasting what electricity usage is going to be in the future, to make sure that the supply and demand are perfectly balanced in order to avoid a blackout scenario.
    But of course, this doesn't always work out the way we might hope. Blackouts are still a very frequent problem, and so does anyone remember the northeast blackout of 2003? Yeah, it was a major, major blackout. It was also a really, really great example of a cascading failure.
    And so basically what happened is that it was a really hot August day and heat makes transmission lines sag, and so a transmission line in Ohio touched a tree, and it caused the current to briefly increase, and this caused the protective automatic equipment to automatically shut off the line. So then all of the electricity that had been going down that transmission line needed to find someplace else to go, and that caused other lines to get overloaded and then they tripped off, and so normally this is a totally manageable problem. The operator pushes a few buttons, they make a couple phone calls, everything's balanced again.
    However, in this particular situation, First Energy who was in charge of that first transmission line, it turned out that as you might remember from earlier in the morning, they had a computer that had a software bug, a race condition, so what ended up happening was that that computer was frozen for about an hour before anyone noticed and because of that, no one heard or saw any alarms suggesting that everything was going horribly horribly wrong and so they didn't intervene, they ever didn't do anything. And so ultimately this blackout affected 20 million people in Ontario and all of New York City lost power, it took two days to two weeks to get the power back on, Amtrak stopped working, cell phones stopped working, water systems lost pressure. So obviously this was an incredibly expensive accident. Estimates put it at $6 billion. And the reason I'm telling you this story is because reliability is the most important thing that a utility does, and so often if you are talking to someone who works at a utility, and you have some crazy new idea of how you're going to just revolutionize the whole system they just have to reorganize, no big deal, the first thing they're going to tell you is I don't know, I'm really worried that that's going to impact reliability. Because utilities are not going to do anything that impacts reliability. And they shouldn't. Having reliable electricity is critical for our economy and for public health. So I've talked a little bit about how the electricity grids operated, gave you a sense of that and so now I want to talk a little bit about the market, regulatory and policy parts.
    And so as indicated on the slide, states are generally separated into regulated and restructured markets. And so in the white states, like Washington and Missouri, you'll find that we have regulated gas and electricity markets and so generally what this means is that there's a public utility commission, and they're responsible for overseeing a utility who is a monopoly, that operates in a specific region and so if that utility wants to invest in more infrastructure, if they want to change the electricity prices, they have to go and get permission from that regulator. And so in this context, you'll find a bigger utility. You'll also find municipal utilities owned and operated by the city government. Also coops and they operate for a not for profit business model and so with the blue states are deregulated or restructured and so deregulated is kind of a misnomer, because there's actually still a lot of regulation, there's still a public utility commission. But what this generally means is that they're operated with market principles. And so in the dark blue states like Texas and Oregon, they are deregulated. And in the light blue states are where they've deregulated the gas and the stripey ones are where we we've deregulated both the gas and the electricity markets. Different companies own the generation and the wires, so that no one has a conflict of interest.
    And so this is something -- this deregulated and restructured markets are still pretty controversial, so for example, there's lots of discussions right now about how do 100% renewable energy policies fit into a market structure? The problem here is that you can't just use a carbon price, because these renewable energy policies are not technology-neutral, so if you have a carbon price, what's more than likely to happen is that you'll increase natural gas generation, maybe nuclear generation. But you won't necessarily drive solar and wind adoption the way that the law is really intending, so then the question is it OK, if a carbon price isn't supposed to work, what should we do? Should we have separate markets? Should we reregulate? This is serious conversation that people are having, there's lots of uncertainty about where we're going to move forward. So just to give you one example on the policy side, I'm going to talk about how net excess generation, so basically if you have solar panels on your roof and you produce more electricity than you use, that's excess generation and the way that that gets compensated differs depending on what state you live in. And so in the dark blue states, like California, the excess generation is compensated at the retail rate. So basically this means that if you are generating more electricity than you use, your electricity meter is actually going to run backwards and so that's awesome if you really want to encourage people to adopt solar, it makes the economics awesome, but the negative side is it that it makes the utility's job a lot harder, because the entire electrical grid is designed so that utilities put power on and customers take power off. It's a one-way flow and so with solar power, we're completely changing that whole paradigm, so now customers can inject power into the grid, and at the same time, the utility is still responsible for reliability. They're still responsible for making sure that everything is perfectly balanced that whole time. And there is still a cost associated with that.
    And so at the like middle blue states, so for example, Maine, they compensate at the retail rate at first for some of the generation and then they switch to a lower rate. At the light blue, like Missouri, they only will credit it at a lower rate. Typically it's the avoided cost rate or the wholesale rate and so this is basically what the utility would have paid for that generation.
    And the idea here is that it's actually accounting for a little bit of the cost that the utility is incurring, because they're still the backup generation for that home.
    So even if you are putting electricity into the grid, at any moment your solar panels, for example, might stop work everything and you would need electricity and the utility is there to make sure that you get it. And then in the white states like Texas -- sorry, the striped ones, Oklahoma is the one example here, they actually have no obligation to compensate excess generation and in the white states like Texas they have no statewide rules obligating them to compensate or not compensate generation, and so the main point I wanted to make sure is that when you're trying to figure out the economics of solar, it's not necessarily just about how sunny your roof is. There's going to be different market and policy conditions that affect the economics of it, and this varies depending on what state you're in.
    And so I've talked a little bit about how the electricity is operated today and how there's this really complex interplay between technology, the market, the regulatory environment and policy.
    Have I also mentioned that everything is changing? And there's three trends that are really shifting the industry. So that's decentralization, electrification and digitalization. So I'm going to go into a little bit more detail about each of these.
    So decentralization, the whole idea is that we're shifting from this really centralized system where you have these big power plants that are distributing all the electricity to a decentralized system where anyone can go and buy some solar panels and be injecting power into the grid.
    And so the main technologies that are involved here are distributed generation, so typically solar panels, distributed storage, but then also using less electricity matters here. So megawatts is typically the term of phrase, so energy efficiency and demand response.
    And so these different technologies create problems as well as opportunities. So for example, with solar panels, one of the complaints that utilities often have is that there's this thing called the duck curve, and so it's called a duck curve, because people think it looks like a duck. So do you see the duck?
    [laughter]
    
    Yeah, it looks like a duck. And so the idea here is in a when you have this sharp drop in electricity usage, that's really hard for utilities to deal with. These big power plants like coal and nuclear, they can't change the electricity output that quickly, and so that's why there's been a big resurgence and why it's been really valuable to have big resurgence in natural gas, because that has a much bigger ramping capability. And so that's why people are really excited about storage, and so storage has the potential to address the duck curve, and so storage, by being able to absorb some of that electricity can flatten the peaks and valleys and so what that means is that utilities are super-happy, because it actually makes the electricity much more predictable, or the electricity demand much more predictable. But there's also energy efficiency and so the idea here is to reduce the overall demand. And then there's demand response and so this is typically a very targeted effort and so for example, during a peak demand crisis, for example it's a hot summer day, everyone's got their air conditioning running and the utility is having trouble supplying all of that electricity, they'll use a demand response program to get people to reduce their electricity usage so they can keep the supply and demand perfectly balanced.
    And so in each of these cases, customers are making decisions about whether or not to implement these technologies and utilities may or may not be involved in that decision. And so it's become really clear to utilities that they need to be a lot more involved in customer decisionmaking and being able to coordinate across customers.
    So the next big trend is electrification, and so in this graph on the left, this is talking about how the cost of lithium ion batteries has been dropping and is projected to continue to drop.
    And so this is making storage a lot more of a realistic option. And so in the graph on the right, you can see that electric vehicles are projected to be an increasing percentage of new car sales and so by 2040, it's almost 40% of new car sales and this creates a lot of really exciting opportunities so for example, instead of having homeowners buy a separate stationary battery storage for their house, maybe they can just use their car that they already have, in this future wherever has electric cars. You know, maybe we can provide grid reliability services by slowing or stopping the charging of electric vehicles based on what's happening on the grid and what's going to provide the most benefit.
    You know, maybe if we really think far into the future, if we have autonomous vehicles, maybe while you're at work, your autonomous electric vehicle can go drive to a part of the grid that needs some support and provide services there and make money while you're at work, you know, sky's the limit. There's all kinds of crazy things.
    But the idea here really is that electrification is really changing the boundaries of what matters for grid operations. It's -- so utilities worry about people using less electricity, because it affects their bottom line, but also, it affects their degrees of freedom for being able to address grid reliability. So electrification increases those degrees of freedom.
    And the last big trend is digitalization. And so the idea here is that we have all these smart sensors and automatic control systems, and all this big data being collected, that we can use to optimize the system, and so for example, there are some utilities who, when there's a blackout, they have no idea how big it is. Like, they have no visibility into their system, and that's why you have to call them on the phone and tell them, hey, I don't have electricity, because they don't know. So there's been a big push to have advanced metering infrastructure, or AMI on smart meters. And so what this does is gives utilities a lot more visibility into the system. So that they know how much electricity individual houses are using.
    And so this also means the utilities are collecting huge amounts of data about how much electricity homes are using and most utilities don't even have the capacity to deal with any of that data. Like they don't have a data scientist, you know, they're barely able to just store all that data. So there's a lot of opportunity to be able to better leverage that that's not happening right now.
    This also includes technology like smart inverters, so smart inverters are basically a piece of electronics that interfaces between a solar panel and the grid. So we can imagine at some point we'll have these smart inverters where they can actually sense the grid conditions and they can inject power based on what they're sensing based on conditions of the grid to increase grid reliability and so that's how we get to some of these ideas about having a self-healing grid. So of course all of this is very exciting but what people worry about is the cybersecurity implications and so there's already cybersecurity risks at utilities, and only going to increase them. And so there's a lot of work being done, for example, to increase information-sharing across utilities, so that they're better able to identify attacks sooner. In some ways you might think that oh, this might be a an argument for why we should have more distributed energy generation, because if the system is more resilient, then that means we won't be -- the impact of a cyber attack won't be as bad and so then it won't matter. Of course, that assumes that the smart inverter, which is a critical piece of a distributed energy system is not the actual attack vector. So there are still a lot of things to get figured out.
    So I've talked a little bit about the grid today and hope I've sort of explained how it's a pretty complex system right now, and it's only going to get more and more complicated as we move into the future.
    And so now I want to talk about just one example future that we could be headed towards.
    So everyone close your eyes. Close your eyes.
    And so let's imagine a future where you just bought a house in a new up and coming neighborhood. The house already has solar panels and a built in home energy management system. You definitely paid a premium for T you pull your electric car into the garage and it starts wirelessly charging, based on your settings to minimize comment you start plugging in all of your internet of things devices. Course they won't talk to the home energy management system right away. You didn't die and go to Heaven. This is the real world. You check your mail, and you have a welcome to the neighborhood blockchain letter. That's right, you're cool. You have a neighborhood micro-grade with a peer to peer market. So you can open your eyes, so let's explore that a little bit. Like, what does that mean to have a neighborhood blockchain?
    And so decentralization, electrification and digitalization, aren't just changing the technology of the grid. It's also forcing people to completely rethink how the market and policy environment is.
    And so one of the more interesting departures is these blockchain-based micro-grids or more broadly we can think of them as local energy markets and so the idea here is that there are consumers who are homes without any generation and there's prosumers, who are consumers who are producing electricity, and there's some sort of market mechanism that manages the flow of information about energy transaction, as well as the financial transactions, and so there is a lot of interest in the potential of blockchain to be that market mechanism. The idea is that this could reduce the administrative cost of transacting at this scale. Assuming we get a couple minor issues, like the computation cost of blockchain, figured out.
    [laughter]
    But that hasn't stopped people from using it. And so just in case you're like the one person who doesn't know what blockchain is, I'm going to do a quick reveal.
    >> So the idea is that there is a participate in the network that wants to request a transaction of some sort. That is broadcast to the other computers in the network and each computer has to independently validate or authenticate that the request is valid. Then once it gets verified, you can produce a new block of data, that block is added to the blockchain permanently and you've done it. Is anyone here from Brooklyn? Have you heard of the Brooklyn Microgrid? It's not totally surprising, I guess. I I don't have any special insight or information about the Brooklyn Microgrid, but my understanding is it's a pretty small project. It's run out of the LO3 energy, they're a startup and so my understanding is there's only a couple of people who are transacting on it. They've got big ambitions to have price -- but it's exciting that people are actually testing using blockchain for a local energy market on a micro-grid here.
    And so generally the generally the idea is you have to separate the physical and virtual layers. So all of the market and pricing information is added to the blockchain, one block at a time and transmitted to all of the other homes on the network. However, in order for this to work, you need to also be able to transfer the electricity, and you cannot transfer electricity with blockchain.
    
    [laughter]
    
    So for this part. Just to be clear.
    [laughter]
    
    And so for this part they actually have to take advantage of the distribution network and so in this case they're working with their local utility, Con Ed, what this means is that if you're trying to buy renewable energy from the neighborhood blockchain in the Brooklyn Microgrid, you're not guaranteed to get electrons that came from solar panels. That's not how the grid works. You can't control where the electrons go. So what you're really paying for is for someone to generate electricity from a solar panel and put that onto the grid and then you take electricity at the same time and so as more and more homes get solar power in your micro-grid, the probability of the electrons you personally receive come from solar increases so over time you'll get there, but there's no guarantee. And so how exactly does this transaction work? So the ideas is that you have consumers who are indicated by a C. Those are the people who need to buy electricity and then you have the prosumers who are designated by a P. They have to put in an order for how much electricity they want to buy in the next 15-minute interval and what's the maximum price they're willing to pay and then which prosumer needs to put in how much they're willing to sell and what is the lowest price they're willing to accept. And so once they get their electricity needs and you go to the next person and the next person and the next person and then the last person who gets electricity allocated to them based on how much is available, that's the market clearing price. And so that's the price that everyone pays.
    And so, this is actually really, really similar to how energy markets work at a regional scale in general. And so one of the main barriers here is that there's actually no legal or regulatory structure for this sort of hyperlocal transaction. And so this is one of the major things that the Brooklyn Microgrid is really trying to figure out. Like, what should the rules be? Like, what license do they need? Like, whose permission do they need? They're really trying to figure out some of these questions so it's kind of exciting to see where this goes, so I encourage you to follow the Brooklyn Microgrid and see where they go. But of course not everything is super-shiny and wonderful. There's definitely a lot of people who have some serious concerns about using blockchain for energy transactions.
    There's concerns about the electricity usage, the computation costs, that maybe this is going to wipe out the cost savings you get from the reduced transaction costs. Maybe this is going to be too complicated for your average consumer. There's concerns about security and privacy, you know, how much information do you want your neighbors to have about how much electricity you're using? What if a company had that information? Does that change things? So there's still a lot of open questions and technical questions that I'm very confident people will sort out over time, and so a bigger question that's much harder to answer is, is this the best idea? Like, is this where we should be going with our electricity system? And so I want to talk a little bit about that. About these are some of my personal research interests, about how do we figure out today how to set ourselves up for the best future? And so we've really only discussed one potential future and one regulatory and policy environment, and as you may recall, the rules are really different depending on what state you live in.
    And so depending on where you are, the rules about how the electricity grids operated, who can participate, and how they participate are going to be really different and so there's not going to be a one size fits all solution. You know, not everyone is going to think a blockchain-based micro-grid is it right for me. And so for example, thinking about some of these equity questions, there might be people who can't afford the capital cost of these home energy management systems that also need to program. That's a lot of work, setting up all of your settings and what you want it to do. They might just want to know what their electricity bill is going to be and not have to worry about any fluctuation from markets. So we need to make sure that low and middle income households in particular are going to be able to engage in these futures and we're not just setting it up for the elite and so one proposal for how to think about these futures is from the National Labs through the Department of Energy. And so this walk/jog/run model is set up to try and reduce risk. Because as I mentioned before, the most important thing in the electricity system is to make sure it is super reliable and so in that sort of system it's really hard to deal with sudden change.
    This is not a model that's set up to do disruptive change. It's about having a slow evolution.
    So for example, right now, we're at Stage 1. So we have really low distributed energy adoption. We have aging infrastructure, we're still trying to get reliability and resilience and efficiency in place. But eventually we'll get to Stage 2 and at that point we're jogging and so the idea here is we're going to have a political bit more distributed energy resources adoption and at that point we're really going to have to rethink how the distribution grid works entirely. So right now the distribution grid is it really focused on just delivering power. Just one job, delivering power. But we really are going to need to think of it as a platform, as something that's providing grid services and ensuring that electricity is reliable and dealing with all of these injections of power at different points in the network.
    And then eventually even later, we're going to get to Stage 3, where we're running. And the idea here is that we'll have really high distributed energy adoption, and that's when we're going to see really different utility business models. We're going to see more local energy markets. It's going to be a really different world, and the idea here is that this type of transition gives us time to get a new status quo at each step, and this is what's going to make sure that we maintain reliability in the system.
    So I want to take a step back and sort of talk about how I approach these types of things. And so my academic training is really focused on being able to quantify the human part of complex problems, and so I assume that for any complex problem, there's going to be human, organizational and technical components to both the problem, as well as the solution.
    And so the main way that I address this is using decision science, and any decision science project is it going to really be focused on one or more of these three questions. So how should people make decisions? You do normative analysis. How do people make decisions? With descriptive research, and then how can we help people make better descriptions. And this is really looking at prescriptive interventions, and things like randomly controlled trials which I'm going to talk a lot about right now.
    And so as we go down this path, what I'm arguing is that we don't do a very good job of making sure that we have an evidence-based strategy. We don't do a very good job of making sure that we're building a body of evidence to make decisions based on.
    And so I would argue that the best way to build that body of evidence is with experiments.
    And I don't mean experiments as in try it and see if it works!  I mean randomized control trials and we should run them the way we run medical trials and this is getting at one of those subtle differences between engineering and sciences. It's not about testing it and see if it works, it's about building a body of evidence. So I'm going to talk about two papers to drive this home. And so I'm going to be really focusing on consumer-facing experiments. Because whenever you involve people, things are more complicated and therefore, more interesting.
    So take a step back. Why a are randomized control trials the gold standard? So the whole idea here is you have a population of interest and you randomly assign people to either the intervention group, which might be receiving a programmable thermostat, or the control group, which would be receiving a regular old dumb thermostat. And you do controls. And you can make a causal statement about the programmable thermostats because you randomly assign people into those two groups, so the whole idea is it that any other reason for people to use electricity is going to be randomly distributed between these two groups, and so any change is going to just be because of the programmable thermostats. The other key piece here is the control group. And so it's possible that because of the economy or something like this, people are going to reduce their electricity usage anyway and so you want to be able to account for that when you're trying to estimate the effect of the programmable thermostats.
    And so you know, maybe that sounds easy, but it's not. It's actually really complicated to run a really good randomized control trial and so Alex Davis and colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University examined 32 publicly available pilots that estimated the effectiveness of three interventions to reduce residential electricity usage and these included in-home displays, programming. And this was ... actually the research group that I was in when I was doing my Ph.D. at Carnegie Mellon.
    And so there's six types of bias that we need to watch out for in randomized control trials and so basically it gets down to really poor randomization, and so if you have people actively volunteering to participate in a particular experiment, it's biased. If they're assigned to an intervention or control group that's not completely random, it's biased. Even some things that might seem sort of random, like assigning people based on their birthday, not random. There might be something systematically different about people who are born in June, rather than November.
    And so if people know that the other conditions -- what the other conditions in the experiment are, it's also going to be biased, and so these are the types of issues that we really need to be thinking about when we're designing randomized control trials. And so Davis, Alex Davis and his colleagues, looked at these 32 publicly available electricity pilots and they found that most of them were biased or they weren't documented well enough to even be able to tell if they were biased, which makes everyone pretty suspicious that they were biased. And so one of the worst ones was volunteer selection, and so in this case, 27 out of 32 of these studies used an opt-in design rather than an opt-out design and so this means that they were only doing these experiments with people who wanted to participate and these are people who are most likely to benefit from the intervention and so what's going to happen is you're going to inflate your results. And so for example, what they found was that they used some statistical methods to estimate the impact of the biased study design, and they found that for reducing peak electricity use, so that's the maximum amount of electricity that a home uses, the results were roughly halved. So they were still significant but they were just smaller and the one that worked the best was dynamic pricing for automation. Also looking at overall electricity use, they found that most of the interventions that were tested, the original studies found really small effects, but when they added the corrections, they weren't statistically significant. There was no impact. The only one that still remained standing was in-home displays, and so they were significant, but they had a really small effect, so it dropped to 3% from 5%, and this is really important if we're thinking about how to do cost-benefit analysis. Because if we are overestimating the benefit from these types of programs, then it's going to be really hard to figure out how much cost to actually allocate to running them in the real world.
    Also, company politics can get in the way. When I was doing my Ph.D., we tried to work with a utility to run a rkt randomized control trial and we wanted to do an opt-out design because it's the gold standard, and we explained it's an experiment, and they can opt out if they want. But the utility was terrified to implement this. They were really worried that they'd get terrible press because people thought this they were wasting money because they were sending in-home displays to people who didn't want or need them.
    And so what they ended up telling us was that you know, we -- how about we tell you what we want to do, and then you tell us how to do it as scientifically as possible?
    [laughter]
    
    Obviously it's not a way to do good science so we ended up not being able to work with them and we never ran that study and so there's a lot of challenges to kind of getting utilities on board with this notion that randomized control trials are the right way to go.
    And so one of the challenges is even if you lay it out in this nice way where you explain that there's technology pilots and then eventually you evolve to demonstrations where you engage consumers and I'll just point out that I'm not using pilots in this way, I use pilots for everything and I'm not going to stop doing that because I showed you this slide. So one of the challenges is that sometimes the point of doing a pilot has nothing to do with science. In some cases, utilities are just trying to keep their public utility commission happy. They just want to look busy and avoid changing the status quo. They have no intention of learning anything with these pilots. In other cases, there's just a lot of confusion about who's responsible for deciding if it's good science or not. Like, is it the public utility commission's job? Like, these are a bunch of lawyers, they don't necessarily know what's good science and what's not. And so there's a lot of challenges associated with making sure that utilities are actually engaging with the right kinds of experts when they're trying to make she is decisions and build this body of evidence.
    So one other paper that I do want to mention is called Solarize Your Community. This is actually a public-facing report which I think is awesome. So this is by Ken gilling ham at Yale and Brian Bullinger at Duke University. They talked about these solarize campaigns which is when a city or town gets together and get a lot of people to adopt solar at the same time so they get a price discount. You can see there's a big cluster in Connecticut to actually run randomized control trials and learn significant about what's the best way to design a solarize campaign.
    And so they found that having a solarize campaign increased adoptions. So the solarize campaign is the blue line, and the control, the nonsolarrize adoptions are the red line and the gray box is showing how long the solarize campaign lasted and you can see that there's a huge increase in the number of solar adoptions that happened at that time, and that there was also a really sharp decrease in the price that people were paying for those installations and that that price decrease only lasted as long as the solarize campaign lasted so there's a lot of incentive for people to participate.
    And so they tested a bunch of different variations to try and figure out, you know, what is it about the solarize model that really makes it work? You know, what's the core of it that matters? And so ultimately what they found was that the choice model was the best approach.
    And so it had a competitive application, so cities and towns were really motivated. They had resources available to devote to it. It lasted for 20 weeks, which was enough time to kind of roll it out. When they limited it to 10 or 12 weeks, they actually increased administrative costs because it was so much harder to get the word out that quickly. It has a tier pricing structure, so as more and more people adopted, the group discount that everyone got got increased, got higher and higher, and so people were really motivated to get their neighbors and other people to adopt solar so that they'd all get a better price. But the key was that they had two or three installers, so introducing this small amount of competition was really valuable and they actually had the most adoptions and the lowest prices across all of the models that they tested and also that price decrease lasted the longest after the solarize campaign ended so just this little tweak of adding some competition among the installers had a huge impact and they never would have known that unless they had run all these randomized control trials. So this has really got me thinking about how can we do a better job of rolling out that information?
    And so one thing I found out about was this whole concept called implementation science so it's something that's really done mostly in public health and it's basically this whole body of research. They have a journal, they have a conference to try and figure out, what happens after you do the randomized control trial? Once you figure out the best way to do something, how do you get everyone to do that? How do you get all the doctors and all the hospitals to actually do that? And so I think there's an analogy here to energy. That we need to think about how to do this for the electricity system.
    And so I'm just, you know, spitballing some ideas. I think that we can do research on regulator and utility decisionmaking. That's somethings I'm interested in. We can actually actively build this body of evidence. Maybe we should be training utilities and regulators and policymakers on what it means to do randomized control trials and why they're valuable. Wouldn't it be awesome if utilities has a chief evaluation officer who's responsible for making sure that this stuff happened? That would be awesome and so last, I just want to leave you with a couple of thoughts about where you fit in.
    Soy we've talked about how the grid's interconnected. How we have this complex interplay between the regulatory market and policy environment, how these trends in decentralization, electrification and ... it's possible that block chains are our future. People are advocating for this walk jog run model. But if we're doing that, we need to have scientifically valid experiments even though that's very politically fraught and utilities are scared. Because most of the electricity experiments are biased and we're actually going to spend more money in the long run running these biased experiments than if we did it right from the beginning. So the idea here is to use these randomized control trials. And so what I want to leave you with is there's opportunities for you to engage with some of this. You can participate, like if you own your house, like you can think about getting solar. If you go to energysage.com. It's a really great resource for figuring out if solar works for you. Also advocate, a lot of these decisions are being made by policymakers and elected officials so make sure that they know what kind of an electricity system you want. Make sure you vote. It's always a good idea. If you are in the electricity space or you're thinking about getting into it, you know, run experiments, it's really important to make sure we are he building this body of evidence and sharing it. And lastly I want to emphasize the importance of increasing accessibility. There's a lot of opportunity to make sure that this transition is accessible, particularly for low and moderate income households where they might not have the financial or just time resources to engage with all of this change. And so, you know, technology is not going to solve all of these problems. But it's definitely going to be part of the solution. So thank you.
    [applause]
    
    >> Awesome, thank you, Casey, that was so cool, awesome. So we have a break until about 3:20. There are like snacks like granola bars and fruit outside. There's always coffee. And tea. And so enjoy that and we'll see you back at 3:20 for Standards We Love.
    [break]
